The Caesar Cipher is one of the simplest and oldest methods of encrypting messages, named after Julius Caesar, who reportedly used it to protect his military communications. This technique involves shifting the letters of the alphabet by a fixed number of places. For example, with a shift of three, the letter ‘A’ becomes ‘D’, ‘B’ becomes ‘E’, and so on. Despite its simplicity, the Caesar Cipher formed the groundwork for modern cryptographic techniques.
Thus to cipher a given text we need an integer value, known as a shift which indicates the number of positions each letter of the text has been moved down. 

The encryption can be represented using modular arithmetic by first transforming the letters into numbers, according to the scheme, A = 0, B = 1,…, Z = 25. Encryption of a letter by a shift n can be described mathematically as. 

 E.g if the shift is 3, then the letter A would be replaced by the letter D, B would become E, C would become F, and so on. The alphabet is wrapped around so that after Z, it starts back at A.
 
 Features of Caesar Cipher
 1. Substitution cipher: The Caesar cipher is a type of substitution cipher, where each letter in the plaintext is replaced by a letter some fixed number of positions down the alphabet.
 2. Fixed key: The Caesar cipher uses a fixed key, which is the number of positions by which the letters are shifted. This key is known to both the sender and the receiver.
 3. Symmetric encryption: The Caesar cipher is a symmetric encryption technique, meaning that the same key is used for both encryption and decryption.
 4.Limited keyspace: The Caesar cipher has a very limited keyspace of only 26 possible keys, as there are only 26 letters in the English alphabet.
 5.Vulnerable to brute force attacks: The Caesar cipher is vulnerable to brute force attacks, as there are only 26 possible keys to try.
 6.Easy to implement: The Caesar cipher is very easy to implement and requires only simple arithmetic operations, making it a popular choice for simple encryption tasks.
 
 
 Rules for the Caesar Cipher

1.Choose a number between 1 and 25. This will be your “shift” value.
2.Write down the letters of the alphabet in order, from A to Z.
3.Shift each letter of the alphabet by the “shift” value. For example, if the shift value is 3, A would become D, B would become E, C would become F, and so on.
4.Encrypt your message by replacing each letter with the corresponding shifted letter. For example, if the shift value is 3, the word “hello” would become “khoor”.
5.To decrypt the message, simply reverse the process by shifting each letter back by the same amount. For example, if the shift value is 3, the encrypted message “khoor” would become “hello”.

Algorithm for Caesar Cipher

Input: 
1. Choose a shift value between 1 and 25.
2. Write down the alphabet in order from A to Z.
3.Create a new alphabet by shifting each letter of the original alphabet by the shift value. For example, if the shift value is 3, the new alphabet would be:
    A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z
    D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z A B C
4.Replace each letter of the message with the corresponding letter from the new alphabet. For example, if the shift value is 3, the word “hello” would become “khoor”.
5.To decrypt the message, shift each letter back by the same amount. For example, if the shift value is 3, the encrypted message “khoor” would become “hello”.

sources:https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/caesar-cipher-in-cryptography/


 
 
